>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 19:
PRESIDENT OBAMA MEETS WITH
FAMILIES OF VICTIMS OF THE SAN
BERNARDINO TERRORIST ATTACK.
HOW BOSTON USES DATA TO TRACK
HOW WELL IT DELIVERS SERVICES TO
RESIDENTS.
AND CONSUMER ADVOCATE RALPH
NADER OPENS A MUSEUM.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS VETOED
LEGISLATION INTENDED TO SLOW HIS
POLICIES ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
THE BILL WOULD HAVE NULLIFIED AN
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
RULE REQUIRING POWER PLANTS TO
REDUCE CARBON EMISSIONS BY ONE-
THIRD OVER THE NEXT 15 YEARS.
HIS "POCKET VETO"-- EXERCISED
AFTER CONGRESS HAD ADJOURNED FOR
THE YEAR-- WAS EXPECTED.
27 STATES ARE SUING TO STOP THE
RULE.
THE PRESIDENT IS IN HAWAII FOR
HIS ANNUAL TWO-WEEK FAMILY
VACATION IN HIS HOME STATE.
EN ROUTE, THE PRESIDENT AND
FIRST LADY STOPPED IN SAN
BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA, TO MEET
RELATIVES OF THE 14 PEOPLE SHOT
AND KILLED BY A RADICAL ISLAMIST
COUPLE AT A HOLIDAY PARTY THIS
MONTH.
THE MEETING, BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
AT A HIGH SCHOOL, LASTED NEARLY
THREE HOURS.
>> SOME DESCRIBED THEIR LOVED
ONES WHO HAD COME TO THIS
COUNTRY AS IMMIGRANTS, OTHERS
WHO HAD LIVED IN THE AREA ALL
THEIR LIVES.
ALL OF THEM EXTRAORDINARILY
PROUD OF THE WORK THEY WERE
DOING TO KEEP PEOPLE HEALTHY AND
SAFE HERE IN THIS COMMUNITY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE F.B.I.
REVEALED IN A CRIMINAL COMPLAINT
THIS WEEK THAT ONE OF THE SAN
BERNARDINO SHOOTERS, THE
HUSBAND, SYED RIZWAN FAROOQ, AND
AN ALLEGED CO-CONSPIRATOR WHO
BOUGHT THE COUPLE'S ASSAULT
RIFLES, WERE INSPIRED BY FORMER
AL QAEDA LEADER ANWAR AWLAKI.
THE U.S. KILLED AWLAKI IN A
DRONE STRIKE FOUR YEARS AGO IN
YEMEN, BUT HIS LEGACY LIVES ON
IN HOURS OF RECORDINGS, MANY
POSTED ON LINE.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER SCOTT
SHANE WROTE THE BOOK "OBJECTIVE
TROY," ABOUT AWLAKI AND THE
DRONE WAR.
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM BALTIMORE.
YOU MENTIONED IN YOUR ARTICLE
THERE IS INCREASED PRESSURE ON
INTERNET COMPANIES.
WHERE IS THAT COMING FROM AND
HOW ARE THESE COMPANIES
RESPONDING?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT REALLY COMING
FROM THE GOVERNMENT, ALTHOUGH
MANY COUNTER-TERRORISM OFFICIALS
ARE VERY DISTRESSED BY AWLAKI'S
CONTINUING INFLUENCE ON THE
RADICALIZATION OF SOME
AMERICANS.
IT'S COMING MORE FROM THE SORT
OF ADVOCATES WHO ARE WORKING TO
COUNTER EXTREMISM, ESPECIALLY IN
THE MUSLIM COMMUNITY,
AND SOME OF IT'S COMING FROM A
GROUP CALLED THE
COUNTER-EXTREMISM PROJECT, WHICH
INCLUDES A NUMBER OF FORMER
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS.
THEY'RE THE ONES WHO ARE SORT OF
LEADING THIS CALL FOR YOUTUBE
AND OTHER INTERNET PLATFORMS TO
PULL DOWN AWLAKI'S MATERIAL.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE WAS
CONNECTIONS, THE FORT HOOD
SHOOTERS, THE TSARNAEV BROTHERS.
THEY WERE ALL IN SOME WAY,
SHAPE, OR FORM INSPIRED FROM
WHAT THEY SAW ON THE INTERNET
FROM AWLAKI.
WHAT IS THE THING THAT ACTUALLY
TRIGGERS SOMEONE TO PICK UP ARMS
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES?
>> IN WRITING THIS BOOK ABOUT
ANWAR AL-AWLAKI, I USED YOUTUBE
AND OTHER INTERNET SITES AND
LISTENED TO MANY, MANY HOURS OF
AWLAKI TALKING.
SO PEOPLE WHO WANT TO UNDERSTAND
RADICALIZATION, WANT TO
UNDERSTAND TERRORISM, THESE ARE
IMPORTANT THINGS TO LOOK AT.
BUT IT IS COMPLICATED BECAUSE,
YOU KNOW, THE COUNTRY IS
SPENDING BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO
PREVENT TERRORISM, AND, YOU
KNOW?
IN SOME WAYS THE MAIN ENGINES OF
RADICALIZATION ARE PROVIDED,
IRONICALLY, BY SOME OF THE
UNITED STATES' MOST SUCCESSFUL
AND PROMINENT COMPANIES.
>> Sreenivasan: AS YOU POINTED
OUT, I MEAN, THERE WERE 60,000
RESULTS FOR HIS VIDEOS ON
YOUTUBE TODAY.
SO HOW-- WHAT IS THE
TECHNOLOGICAL FIX?
>> WELL, PART OF WHAT MAKES HIS
PARTICULAR CASE COMPLICATED IS
THAT HE WAS A VERY SUCCESSFUL,
POPULAR IMAM IN THE UNITED
STATES FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS,
AND SO HE DID, FOR EXAMPLE, A
53-CD SET ON THE LIFE OF THE
PROPHET MOHAMMED, TOTALLY
MAINSTREAM STUFF, VERY POPULAR
AMONG ENGLISH-SPEAKING MUSLIMS,
CERTAINLY IN THE YEARS BEFORE
AWLAKI BECAME A TERRORIST.
AND THAT IS UP THERE ON YOUTUBE
AS WITH WELL.
THE COUNTER-EXTREMISM PROJECT
BELIEVES YOUTUBE SHOULD TAKE
DOWN NOT JUST THE CALLS FOR
VIOLENCE FROM ANWAR AL-AWLAKI,
BUT ALL OF HIS MATERIAL, BECAUSE
THEY SAY THAT THE MAINSTREAM
STUFF SORT OF ESTABLISHES HIS
RESPECTABILITY AND HIS
AUTHORITY.
AND THEN WHEN HE TELLS PEOPLE,
"YOUR RELIGIOUS OBLIGATION IS TO
KILL AMERICANS AND ATTACK THE
UNITED STATES," THAT HITS HOME.
BUT MANY CIVIL RIGHTS GROUPS,
MUSLIM ADVOCACY GROUPS HAVE A
BIG PROBLEM WITH THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
SCOTT SHANE, REPORTER FROM THE
"NEW YORK TIMES," JOINING US
FROM BALTIMORE, HIS BOOK IS
CALLED "OBJECTIVE TROY."
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CITY OF
BOSTON CURRENTLY MONITORS STEADY
STREAMS OF ELECTRONIC DATA TO
MEASURE HOW WELL EVERY CITY
AGENCY IS DOING ITS JOB, FROM
FIGHTING FIRES AND CRIME TO
FIXING POTHOLES AND STREET
LIGHTS.
THE CITY IS ABOUT TO BEGIN
CRUNCHING ALL THOSE NUMBERS INTO
A DAILY "CITY SCORE" TO GRADE
ITSELF.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
EXPLAINS HOW BOSTON IS AIMING TO
BE MORE ACCOUNTABLE THROUGH
ANALYTICS.
THE REPORT IS PART OF OUR SERIES
"URBAN IDEAS," HOW CITIES ARE
INNOVATING TO SOLVE PROBLEMS.
>> Reporter: IT'S 6:00 A.M. ON A
THURSDAY MORNING AT THE
HEADQUARTERS OF BOSTON'S PUBLIC
WORKS DEPARTMENT.
DANNY NEE, WHO'S IN CHARGE OF
MAKING SURE BOSTON'S STREETS AND
SIDEWALKS STAY CLEAN AND IN GOOD
REPAIR STARTS THE DAY BY LOGGING
ONTO A COMPUTER APPLICATION
CALLED "CLEAN."
>> THIS IS WHAT I'M RESPONSIBLE
FOR ON A WEEKDAY, MONDAY THROUGH
FRIDAY.
I HAVE KIND OF FROM MASS. AVE.
THROUGH THE NORTH END.
>> Reporter: JUST A FEW YEARS
AGO, NEE'S GARBAGE TRUCK DRIVERS
HAD TO LOOK INSIDE EACH TRASH
CAN TO SEE IF IT NEEDED
EMPTYING.
NOT ANYMORE.
ABOUT ONE-THIRD OF BOSTON'S
TRASH CANS ARE NOW EQUIPPED WITH
SOLAR PANELS AND SENSORS- GREEN
MEANS EMPTY, RED MEANS FULL.
>> OUT OF 416 COMPONENTS, 64 ARE
READY FOR COLLECTION.
IT JUST MAKES FOR A MUCH MORE
PRODUCTIVE DAY, IT'S JUST YOU'RE
GOING RIGHT TO THE SPECIFIC
UNITS, AND YOU'RE DONE.
>> Reporter: THIS IS ONE OF MANY
WAYS THE CITY OF BOSTON IS USING
DATA AND TECHNOLOGY TO OPERATE
MORE EFFICIENTLY AND BETTER
SERVE ITS RESIDENTS.
>> I FIND DATA IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR US TO BRING BETTER SERVICES
TO THE PEOPLE OF THIS CITY AND
>> Reporter: SINCE TAKING OFFICE
TWO YEARS AGO, BOSTON MAYOR
MARTIN WALSH HAS MADE USING DATA
AND ANALYTICS A CENTRAL PART OF
HIS ADMINISTRATION.
SOME OF THESE PROJECTS STARTED
DURING THE 20-YEAR
ADMINISTRATION OF WALSH'S
PREDECESSOR, THOMAS MENINO, BUT
WALSH AND HIS CHIEF OF STAFF,
DANIEL KOH, WANTED TO TAKE IT
FURTHER.
>> BOSTON AS A CITY DOES A GOOD
JOB, OF CREATING SERVICES AND IN
DIFFERENT AREAS.
BUT WE'VE NEVER MEASURED HOW WE
DO.
AND WE LOOK AT YEAR END, AND WE
COMPARE YEAR TO YEAR, BUT WHAT
WE'VE DONE WITH DATA IS TAKEN IT
FROM YEAR-TO-YEAR TO LITERALLY
DAY-TO-DAY.
>> Reporter: WALSH HAS A LARGE
DATA DASHBOARD IN HIS OFFICE
DISPLAYING REAL TIME INFORMATION
FROM ACROSS THE CITY, LIKE THE
NUMBER OF POTHOLES FILLED AND
THE NUMBER OF COMMUNITY CENTER
VISITS.
A MAP SHOWS EACH NEIGHBORHOOD
WALSH HAS VISITED THIS MONTH AND
HOW OFTEN.
>> I'M CONSTANTLY LOOKING AT THE
SCREEN.
I'M CONSTANTLY LOOKING AT THE
MEASUREMENTS OF WHERE WE WERE IN
A DAY, WHERE WE WERE IN A YEAR
AND LOOKING AT IT.
AND IT GIVES ME THE OPPORTUNITY
TO CALL A DEPARTMENT HEAD OR A
MANAGER OR A CABINET CHIEF AND
ASK THEM WHY IS SOMETHING SO
LOW, WHY IS SOMETHING SO HIGH?
>> Reporter: SO, FROM YOUR
OFFICE, HERE AT CITY HALL, YOU
BASICALLY HAVE YOUR FINGER ON
THE PULSE OF WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> EVERY SINGLE DEPARTMENT,
EVERY SINGLE DAY.
>> Reporter: EVERY CITY
COMMISSIONER HAS A DATA
DASHBOARD, TOO, SHOWING EVEN
MORE DETAILED INFORMATION.
THEY WERE CREATED BY THE NEW
CITYWIDE ANALYTICS TEAM-
SOFTWARE ENGINEERS AND DATA
ANALYSTS-- WITH $1.3 MILLION IN
FUNDING FOR BUILDING DATA
ANALYTICS TOOLS.
>> CITIES ARE ACCELERATING AT A
FAST PACE TO PUT DATA TO USE.
>> Reporter: NEIL KLEIMAN
DIRECTS NEW YORK UNIVERSITY'S
INNOVATION LABS AND STUDIES CITY
GOVERNMENT.
>> WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT DATA
AND TECHNOLOGY, YOU DON'T
OFTEN THINK ABOUT CITY
GOVERNMENTS.
THIS IS REALLY SOMETHING THAT'S
BEEN MORE THE DOMAIN OF THE
PRIVATE SECTOR.
BUT CITIES ARE LEARNING FAST.
SO, JUST IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS,
YOU'VE GONE FROM PROBABLY ZERO
TO ABOUT 20 CHIEF DATA ANALYTIC
OFFICERS THAT ARE WITHIN CITY
GOVERNMENTS AND WORKING DIRECTLY
WITH THEIR MAYORS.
>> Reporter: BOSTON WAS ONE OF
THE FIRST CITIES TO PARTNER WITH
WAZE, A MAPPING APP THAT
COLLECTS DATA FROM DRIVERS ABOUT
CONDITIONS ON THE STREETS, LIKE
TRAFFIC JAMS OR ROAD BLOCKS.
THE DATA HELPS BOSTON'S TRAFFIC
CONTROL CENTER DETERMINE WHETHER
TO CHANGE THE TIMING OF TRAFFIC
LIGHTS.
AND LAST SUMMER, MAYOR WALSH
LAUNCHED BOSTON 311, AN IMPROVED
VERSION OF THE CITY'S
CONSTITUENT SERVICES PROGRAM,
MODELED AFTER SIMILAR PROGRAMS
IN BALTIMORE AND NEW YORK.
RESIDENTS CAN CALL IN TO THIS
311 CALL CENTER OR REPORT ISSUES
VIA THE 311 APP ON THEIR
SMARTPHONES-- ANYTHING FROM
MISSED TRASH PICK-UPS TO
POTHOLES.
>> POTHOLES ARE DANGEROUS, THEY
CAN DO DAMAGE TO YOUR CAR AND
EVERYTHING.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER APP CALLED
CITY WORKER ASSIGNS A DEADLINE
TO EACH JOB.
THE GOAL IS TO FILL POTHOLES
WITHIN 24 HOURS.
THEY MEET IT 80% OF THE TIME.
DANNY NEE GETS ALL KINDS OF
REQUESTS.
>> THE PERSON SAYS, "THERE
DOESN'T SEEM TO BE ANY PUBLIC
TRASH CANS ON BUNKER HILL
STREET.
A TRASH CAN NEAR THE BUS STOP
WOULD BE NICE."
>> Reporter: ON THE STREET, NEE
CARRIES A SMARTPHONE AND A
TABLET TO KEEP TRACK OF THE
WORKLOAD.
WHEN HIS CREW FINISHES
INSTALLING THE CAN ON BUNKER
HILL STREET, NEE SNAPS A PHOTO,
WHICH CAN BE SENT TO THE
CONSTITUENT.
>> I'VE NOTICED A REAL
IMPROVEMENT IN TERMS OF RESPONSE
TIME FROM THE CITY, I'D SAY IN
THE LAST YEAR AND A HALF OR SO.
>> Reporter: COMMUNITY ACTIVIST
ERICA MATTISON LIVES IN
DORCHESTER, IN SOUTH BOSTON, AND
IS A FREQUENT USER OF THE 311
APP.
EVEN THOUGH THE CITY CAN'T FILL
EVERY SINGLE 311 REQUEST, HER
REQUEST FOR THIS RECYCLING CAN
OUTSIDE THE LOCAL YMCA WAS
FULFILLED WITHIN A COUPLE OF
DAYS.
>> I'VE ENCOUNTERED A LOT OF
PEOPLE WHO FEEL DISTRUST TOWARD
GOVERNMENT AT A NUMBER OF
LEVELS, SO, I THINK, YOU KNOW,
USING DATA AND HAVING
RESPONSIVENESS AND
ACCOUNTABILITY, USING TECHNOLOGY
IS A GREAT WAY TO BUILD THE
TRUST BETWEEN RESIDENTS AND
THEIR GOVERNMENTS.
>> IT SHOWS THAT GOVERNMENT'S
LISTENING AND GOVERNMENT IS
ENGAGED.
>> Reporter: MIKE DENNEHY IS
BOSTON'S COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC
WORKS.
THE TECHNOLOGY HELPS HIM SEE
WHERE MULTIPLE PROBLEMS EXIST,
SO HE CAN PLAN BETTER AND HIS
CREWS CAN WORK MORE EFFICIENTLY,
TACKLING SEVERAL JOBS AT ONCE.
THE CITY HASN'T CALCULATED HOW
MUCH MONEY THE INCREASED
EFFICIENCY SAVES IT EACH YEAR,
BUT OFFICIALS SAY THE NUMBER OF
SIDEWALKS REPAIRED INCREASED BY
52% BETWEEN 2013 AND 2014, AND
IN THE LAST TWO YEARS, THE TIME
IT TAKES TO FIX STREET LIGHTS
DROPPED FROM 35 DAYS TO 15 DAYS.
IT'S ALL A FAR CRY FROM A FEW
YEARS AGO WHEN DENNEHY'S
DEPARTMENT KEPT TRACK OF JOBS ON
PAPER, AND THERE WAS NO SYSTEM
TO TRACK THEM.
>> I WOULDN'T EVEN CALL IT DATA.
IT WAS JUST, IT WAS JUST TODAY.
IT WAS TODAY'S WORK, AND
TOMORROW'S WORK WAS TOMORROW'S
WORK.
NOW, WE'RE LOOKING BACK AT
YESTERDAY'S WORK AND HOPEFULLY
THAT'LL HELP US DO TOMORROW'S
WORK BETTER.
>> Reporter: WITH SUCH A LARGE
AMOUNT OF DATA AVAILABLE, MAYOR
WALSH'S CHIEF OF STAFF DANIEL
KOH BEGAN THINKING ABOUT HOW TO
DISTILL IT ALL DOWN TO ONE
NUMBER- A DAILY "PASS/FAIL"
GRADE FOR GOVERNMENT
PERFORMANCE.
>> OUR FIRST THOUGHT WAS, "HOW
DO WE CREATE A GOVERNMENT
BATTING AVERAGE?"
>> Reporter: KOH AND THE MAYOR
WERE INSPIRED BY BASEBALL, AND
BILLY BEANE, THE MAIN CHARACTER
IN THE BOOK AND MOVIE,
"MONEYBALL."
AS GENERAL MANAGER OF THE
OAKLAND A'S, BEANE USED
STATISTICS IN A NEW WAY TO MAKE
BETTER HIRING DECISIONS.
>> WE REALIZED THAT WE HAD A
NUMBER OF DIFFERENT VARIABLES
THAT ANY CITY TRACKS- ARTS
GRANTS DOLLARS, WI-FI
AVAILABILITY, CRIME RATES.
AND WE REALIZED THAT WE COULD
MEASURE HOW THAT'S TRENDING TO
OUR TARGET IN EACH OF THOSE
AREAS.
AND WE COULD TAKE IT A STEP
FURTHER, WE CAN ROLL ALL OF THAT
UP INTO A SINGLE NUMBER THAT
TELLS US HOW WELL WE'RE DOING IN
A GIVEN DAY.
>> Reporter: KOH CALLS THE
PROGRAM "CITYSCORE."
>> THIS IS THE FIRST TIME WE'VE
EVER DEBUTED CITYSCORE.
>> Reporter: KOH GAVE NEWSHOUR
THE FIRST LOOK AT CITYSCORE,
WHICH IS SCHEDULED TO GO LIVE IN
JANUARY.
WHEN WE VISITED, THE PROTOTYPE
WAS CRUNCHING DATA FROM 18
PERFORMANCE METRICS, SHOWING HOW
THE CITY WAS MEETING ITS GOALS
FOR EACH ONE.
EVERYTHING FROM GRAFFITI REMOVAL
TO 311 CALL CENTER PERFORMANCE
TO EMERGENCY RESPONSE TIME.
>> AND THIS ALL ROLLS UP TO A
SINGLE SCORE.
ANYTHING ABOVE ONE MEANS THAT
WE'RE EXCEEDING, ANYTHING BELOW
ONE MEANS THAT WE NEED
IMPROVEMENT.
>> Reporter: SO, TODAY,
CITYSCORE IS 1.17.
>> YEAH, SO WE'RE-- WE'RE DOING
WELL TODAY.
BUT YOU CAN SEE THAT THERE ARE
SOME AREAS THAT WE'RE NOT DOING
AS WELL IN A GIVEN DAY OR WEEK
THAT WE NEED TO-- WE NEED TO
FOCUS ON.
>> Reporter: TODAY THOSE
INCLUDES SIGNAL AND SIDEWALK
REPAIRS.
THE TOP PERFORMING METRICS ARE
LIBRARY USERS, TREE MAINTENANCE,
AND FIRE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE
TIME.
CITYSCORE ALSO DISPLAYS METRICS
FOR THE WEEK, MONTH, AND
QUARTER.
>> SO, ONE DAY MAY NOT BE A BIG
CONCERN.
BUT IF IT CONTINUES OVER A WEEK,
OVER A MONTH, OR OVER A QUARTER,
YOU KNOW THAT THAT'S A BAD
TREND, RIGHT.
SO WHAT THE MAYOR CAN DO IS
TACKLE THESE TRENDS WHEN THEY'RE
SIGNALING THAT THEY'RE GOING BAD
BEFORE THEY ACTUALLY GO BAD.
AND THAT'S A REAL SEA CHANGE, IN
OUR OPINION, BECAUSE I THINK
MOST MUNICIPALITIES ARE LOOKING
AT DATA MAYBE IN AN ANNUAL
REPORT AND NOT ON SUCH A REAL
TIME BASIS.
>> Reporter: HOW IS IT THAT A
SINGLE NUMBER CAN POSSIBLY TELL
THE MAYOR WHAT'S GOING ON IN
SUCH A BIG CITY?
>> THE REALITY IS, MOST PUBLIC
OFFICIALS, THEY DON'T HAVE THE
TIME TO BE SITTING THERE REALLY
DIGGING THROUGH THE DATA EVERY
DAY.
SO, WHAT THIS DOES IS IT GIVES
HIM A SENSE OR AN INDICATION OF
WHERE, HOW WE'RE DOING ON A
GIVEN DAY OR QUARTER, AND ALLOWS
HIM TO DELEGATE TO PEOPLE BELOW
HIM WHY WE'RE ON A CERTAIN
COURSE.
>> Reporter: AS THE TECHNOLOGY
DEVELOPS, KOH PLANS TO ADD
DOZENS MORE METRICS.
BOSTON RESIDENTS WILL BE ABLE TO
CHECK CITYSCORE ON THE WEB AND
ACCESS THE RAW DATA BEHIND IT.
NYU PUBLIC POLICY PROFESSOR NEIL
KLEIMAN SAYS NO OTHER CITY IS
ISSUING A DAILY REPORT CARD LIKE
BOSTON.
>> IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT
THEY WOULD BE CAUTIOUS ABOUT
DATA, RIGHT?
BECAUSE DATA CAN REALLY OPEN YOU
UP TO A HIGHER DEMAND FOR
SERVICES.
>> Reporter: MAYOR WALSH ADMITS
THAT AT FIRST, HE WAS CAUTIOUS.
>> IF THE SCORES AREN'T AS HIGH
AS THEY NEED TO BE, YOU KNOW,
WE'RE GOING TO GET CRITICISM FOR
IT.
BUT CITYSCORE, AFTER THINKING
ABOUT IT A LITTLE BIT, IT'S OKAY
TO GET MARKED, IT'S OKAY TO BE
UNDERPERFORMING IN CERTAIN AREAS
BECAUSE THAT GIVES US THE
ABILITY TO FOCUS ON THOSE AREAS
AND IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF
SERVICE THAT WE PROVIDE TO THE
PUBLIC.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR THE PAST 50
YEARS, RALPH NADER HAS BEEN
AMERICA'S LEADING CONSUMER
ADVOCATE-- FIGHTING FOR STRONGER
SAFETY STANDARDS IN PRODUCTS
RANGING FROM CARS TO TOYS, AND
FOR STRONGER GOVERNMENT
REGULATIONS OVER CORPORATIONS.
THROUGH IT ALL, NADER HAS
CHAMPIONED THE POWER OF ANY
CITIZEN TO HAVE THE RIGHT TO
SUE, OR IN LEGALESE, BRING A
TORT.
NOW, HE'S FOUNDED THE "AMERICAN
MUSEUM OF TORT LAW" TO SHOWCASE
LEGAL CASES THAT CHANGED OUR
COUNTRY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S PHIL HIRSCHKORN
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: "THE AMERICAN
MUSEUM OF TORT LAW" FOCUSES ON
BREAKTHROUGHS IN PRODUCT,
WORKER, AND CONSUMER SAFETY
ACHIEVED THROUGH LAWSUITS MOSTLY
FOR WRONGFUL INJURIES OR DEATHS.
CONSUMER CRUSADER RALPH NADER
FOUNDED THE MUSEUM IN HIS
HOMETOWN OF WINSTED,
CONNECTICUT.
>> THE THREE PURPOSES OF THE LAW
OF WRONGFUL INJURY, CALLED TORT
LAW, IS NOT JUST COMPENSATION OF
THE WRONGFULLY INJURED PERSON BY
THE PERPETRATOR, NOT JUST
DISCLOSING DEFECTS THAT HELP
EDUCATE AND ALERT PEOPLE, BUT
IT'S ALSO DETERRENCE.
IT DETERS UNSAFE PRACTICES
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: AT 81, NADER STILL
HAS FAITH IN THE JURY SYSTEM AND
CHAMPIONS CIVIL COURT AS A
TRANSPARENT VENUE THAT EMPOWERS
REGULAR CITIZENS.
>> NO ONE CAN STOP YOU FROM
GOING TO A LAWYER AND FILING A
CASE IN COURT TO HOLD THE
PERPETRATOR OF YOUR WRONGFUL
INJURIES ACCOUNTABLE.
IN THAT SENSE, IT'S THE MOST
DIRECT DEMOCRACY INSTRUMENT THAT
PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY HAVE, AND
IT'S ALL IN OPEN COURT WITH
TRANSCRIPTS, WITH THE MEDIA,
WITH CROSS EXAMINATION.
>> Reporter: NADER FIRST GAINED
NATIONAL ATTENTION IN 1965, WHEN
HE DOCUMENTED DANGEROUS CARS IN
HIS BOOK "UNSAFE AT ANY SPEED."
EXHIBIT A: THE CHEVROLET CORVAIR
MADE BY GENERAL MOTORS.
IT'S THE MUSEUM'S CENTERPIECE.
>> IT WAS NOT A STABLE CAR.
IT LEAKED CARBON MONOXIDE.
THE STEERING COLUMN STARTS A FEW
INCHES FROM THE LEADING SURFACE
OF THE FRONT TIRES, SO YOU GET A
COLLISION LIKE THIS THE STEERING
COLUMN BECOMES A SPEAR IN THE
CHEST OF THE DRIVER.
>> Reporter: G.M. FACED MORE
THAN A HUNDRED LIABILITY
LAWSUITS, AND CORVAIR SALES
PLUNGED.
A YEAR LATER, CONGRESS PASSED A
LANDMARK CAR SAFETY ACT.
>> IN 1966, PRESIDENT LYNDON
JOHNSON SIGNED INTO LAW THE
MOTOR VEHICLE AND HIGHWAY SAFETY
LAWS REGULATING THE AUTO
INDUSTRY, MANDATING SAFETY
STANDARDS LIKE BETTER BRAKES,
BETTER TIRES, SEATBELTS,
EVENTUALLY AIRBAGS, PADDED DASH
PANELS-- ALL THE THINGS WE NOW
TAKE FOR GRANTED.
AND IT'S BEEN A GREAT SUCCESS.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, IT CHANGED
STANDARDS FOR AUTOMOBILE
MANUFACTURING AROUND THE WORLD.
SO DID THE CASE OF THE 1970'S
FORD PINTO AFTER DOZENS OF
PEOPLE WERE BURNED IN
COLLISIONS.
>> IT HAD A FUEL TANK THAT COULD
BE PENETRATED ON A REAR END
COLLISION AND SPEW THE GASOLINE
ALL OVER.
AND FORD KNEW IT.
>> Reporter: NADER SAYS INTERNAL
MEMOS SUBPOENAED IN A LAWSUIT
REVEALED FORD KNEW ABOUT THE
DEFECT IN MILLIONS OF CARS BUT
WAS UNWILLING TO PAY FOR THE
FIX.
DO YOU THINK THE CIVIL JUSTICE
SYSTEM IS ADEQUATE TO PROVIDE
THE ACCOUNTABILITY THAT WE NEED
WHEN IT COMES TO REGULATING
COMPANIES THAT ARE ENGAGED IN
EITHER MISCONDUCT OR COVER-UP OF
MISCONDUCT?
>> THE HISTORY OF SUCCESSFUL
CASES, SOME OF WHICH ARE IN THIS
MUSEUM, ILLUSTRATES THAT OFTEN
THE REGULATORS AND LEGISLATURES
DON'T WAKE UP UNTIL SOME
PLAINTIFF GETS A LAWYER AND DIGS
OUT THE COVER-UPS AND THE
INCRIMINATING INFORMATION ABOUT
A SAFETY DEFECT IN AN AUTOMOBILE
OR ANOTHER PRODUCT.
AND THE MEDIA PICKS IT UP AND
THAT LEADS TO MORE BROAD-BASED
UPGRADES IN SAFETY STANDARDS TO
PROTECT THE PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: NADER CREDITS CIVIL
LAWSUITS FOR STOPPING THE SALE
OF TOYS WITH PARTS THAT WERE
CHOKING HAZARDS, AND BANNING
ASBESTOS, AN INSULATION
MATERIAL ONCE WIDELY USED IN
CONSTRUCTION BUT FOUND TO CAUSE
CANCER.
>> THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM IS A
BACKUP SYSTEM WHEN THE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM FAILS.
>> Reporter: NADER SAYS TOO
OFTEN CRIMINAL PROSECUTORS SHY
AWAY FROM CHARGING CORPORATE
EXECUTIVES.
IN THE RECENT GENERAL MOTORS
IGNITION SWITCH DEFECT, LINKED
TO MORE THAN 100 DEATHS, FEDERAL
PROSECUTORS SETTLED FOR A
$900 MILLION FINE.
IT SEEMS TO HAPPEN ALL THE TIME
AS IF IT'S A COST OF DOING
BUSINESS?
>> WELL, IT'S NOT A COST OF
DOING BUSINESS WHEN THE
CORPORATION EXECUTIVES GO TO
JAIL.
IT'S AMAZING HOW MUCH PENALTY A
COMPANY CAN TAKE IF IT'S BIG
ENOUGH, LIKE GENERAL MOTORS OR
VOLKSWAGEN, AND RIDE IT OUT.
>> Reporter: IN THE 1980S AND
'90S, LAWSUITS REVEALED TOBACCO
COMPANIES KNEW ABOUT AND HID THE
DANGERS OF SMOKING.
THE COMPANIES AGREED TO PAY OUT
MORE THAN $200 BILLION IN
SETTLEMENTS.
>> IT ALL STARTED WITH THESE
LAWYERS WHO OFTEN LOST, AND
AND LOST IN THE COURTS UNTIL
THEY STARTED WINNING AND
DIVULGING ALL THE INTERNAL
DOCUMENTS OF PHILIP MORRIS AND
R.J. REYNOLDS, WHICH SHOWED TWO
THINGS: ONE, THAT THEY KNEW FROM
THE GET GO THAT TOBACCO SMOKE
CAUSED SERIOUS AILMENTS LIKE
LUNG CANCER; AND TWO, THAT THEY
WERE DELIBERATELY MARKETING TO
YOUNG KIDS BECAUSE THEY KNEW IF
THEY COULD HOOK THEM AT 12 YEARS
AGE, THEY GOT THEM FOR LIFE.
>> Reporter: OVER THE YEARS,
NADER'S CRITICS HAVE SAID THE
REFORMS AND REGULATIONS HE HAS
ADVOCATED FOR HAVE ENRICHED
TRIAL LAWYERS AND DRIVEN UP
BUSINESS COSTS.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO CRITICS WHO
WOULD LOOK BACK OVER THESE 50
YEARS, THESE CASES WHICH YOU
CELEBRATE, AND SAY, "YOU KNOW
WHAT, MR. NADER, YOU HAVE A
POINT, BUT IT'S ALSO TURNED US,
THE UNITED STATES, INTO A MUCH
MORE LITIGIOUS SOCIETY"?
>> JUST THE OPPOSITE.
THAT'S INSURANCE COMPANY
PROPAGANDA.
THE CENTER FOR STATE COURTS AND
STUDIES BY LAW PROFESSORS AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN SHOW,
THAT WE DO NOT FILE MORE CIVIL
LAWSUITS PER CAPITA THAN WESTERN
COUNTRIES, AND STUNNINGLY, THAT
WE FILE FEWER CIVIL SUITS PER
CAPITA TODAY THAN WE DID IN THE
1840'S.
>> Reporter: THE STUDY THAT
SUPPORTS THAT CLAIM IS FROM THE
MID-1980S.
A MORE RECENT STUDY SHOWS MORE
LAWSUITS PER CAPITA ARE FILED IN
THE U.S. THAN IN OTHER
INDUSTRIALIZED DEMOCRACIES.
A NEW REPORT BY THE NATIONAL
CENTER FOR STATE COURTS FINDS A
SLIGHT DROP IN CIVIL CASES FILED
IN THE U.S. IN THE PAST DECADE.
NADER RAN FOR PRESIDENT FOUR
TIMES AS A THIRD PARTY CANDIDATE
AND WOULD LIKE THE 2016
CANDIDATES TO FOCUS MORE ON
CONSUMER PROTECTION.
>> ALTHOUGH THE LAW OF WRONGFUL
INJURY AFFECTS MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS EVERY YEAR, IT'S NEVER
DISCUSSED IN POLITICAL
CAMPAIGNS, EXCEPT NEGATIVELY.
>> Reporter: WHAT TITLE DO YOU
PREFER FOR YOURSELF?
>> PUBLIC CITIZEN.
I THINK WE ALL SHOULD BE PUBLIC
CITIZENS WITH A FEW HOURS EVERY
WEEK.
HOW ELSE CAN OUR DEMOCRACY WORK?
HOW ELSE CAN WE HAVE A GOOD
SOCIETY?
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: DEFENSE
SECRETARY ASH CARTER SAYS THE
FRIENDLY FIRE INCIDENT THAT
ACCIDENTALLY KILLED TEN IRAQI
SOLDIERS YESTERDAY RESULTED FROM
"MISTAKES ON BOTH SIDES."
WHILE VISITING A NAVY SHIP IN
THE PERSIAN GULF, CARTER CALLED
IRAQ'S PRIME MINISTER TODAY TO
EXPRESS HIS CONDOLENCES AND
PROMISED A FULL INVESTIGATION.
A U.S. AIRSTRIKE HIT IRAQI
FORCES AS THEY WERE FIGHTING
NEAR THE WESTERN IRAQI CITY OF
FALLUJAH, CURRENTLY HELD BY ISIS
MILITANTS.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
SAYS HIS TROOPS DEPLOYED IN
SYRIA MAY USE GREATER FORCE.
ADDRESSING A SECURITY STAFF
MEETING IN MOSCOW TODAY, PUTIN
SAID, RUSSIA HAS, "MORE MILITARY
MEANS, AND WE WILL USE THEM, IF
NEED BE."
PUTIN ALSO SAID IN AN INTERVIEW
TODAY, MOSCOW WOULD WORK WITH
ALL SIDES, THE U.S. AND ARAB
NATIONS TO RESOLVE THE SYRIAN
CONFLICT.
NEGOTIATORS AT UN-BROKERED TALKS
TO END THE EIGHT-MONTH CIVIL WAR
IN YEMEN HAVE AGREED TO A FORM A
CEASEFIRE COMMITTEE.
IT WILL BE HEADED BY A LEBANESE
GENERAL, WITH MEMBERS OF YEMEN'S
GOVERNMENT, WHICH IS BACKED BY
SAUDI ARABIA AND SUPPORTED BY
THE U.S., AND THE SHIITE REBELS,
KNOWN AS HOUTHIS, WHO ARE BACKED
BY IRAN.
FIGHTING OVER THE PAST THREE
DAYS NEAR YEMEN'S BORDER WITH
SAUDI ARABIA HAS KILLED 75
FIGHTERS ON BOTH SIDES,
ACCORDING TO THE A.P.
PEACE TALKS RESUME TOMORROW IN
SWITZERLAND.
A RECORD NUMBER OF AMERICANS ARE
DYING FROM DRUG OVERDOSES.
THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION REPORTS MORE THAN
47,000 AMERICANS DIED FROM
OVERDOSES IN 2014, THE LATEST
YEAR DATA IS AVAILABLE.
ABUSE OF HEROIN AND OPIOID
PAINKILLERS ACCOUNTED FOR
MORE THAN 28,000, OR 61%, OF THE
OVERDOSES.
THAT'S UP 14% FROM THE YEAR
BEFORE.
C.D.C. DIRECTOR THOMAS FRIEDEN
SAID THE INCREASE IS "ALARMING"
AND CALLED FOR MORE STEPS TO
PREVENT AND TREAT ADDICTION.
IN THE PAST 15 YEARS,
PRESCRIPTIONS FOR PAINKILLERS
HAVE QUADRUPLED, AND FATAL
OPIOID OVERDOSES HAVE DOUBLED.
>> Sreenivasan: DON'T FORGET TO
FOLLOW NEWSHOUR ONLINE TONIGHT
FOR FULL COVERAGE OF THE FINAL
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE
OF 2015 IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.
JOIN US AT 8:00 P.M. EASTERN
TIME AT pbs.org/newshour, AND
ON TWITTER @NEWSHOUR.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.